[Music]
Next we will talk about class inheritance.
This is a very important topic,
in the context of object-oriented programming.
Just as a repetition.
So object-oriented program is a term,
that is used to describe programs,
that use first of all data abstraction, second inheritance
and third dynamic binding.
Data abstractions or interface implementation.
I think you know already
from the first two courses.
You also know in principle inheritance
and dynamic binding,
but also that I want to repeat now briefly
So first polymorphism.
This refers to the ability,
that you can obtain type specific behavior.
And in C++ this is based on the dynamic type
of a reference or a pointer.
So, this means and there are in principle two forms
of polymorphism, if we talk about
dynamic polymorphism,
then this is in the context of classes and inheritance
and in addition to the static type,
that you have in your program,
you also have then a dynamic type,
that can be different from the static type
and in this way you can at runtime dynamically
decide, for example which function you want to call.
So, from the base or from the derived class
and this process is in principle called dynamic binding.
So that is delaying until runtime
the selection of which function you want to run.
As said in C++
this is based on virtual functions.
Now again the definition: What is inheritance?
These are basically types related by inheritance,
that share a common interface.
You have the base class, so this is a class,
that is a parent of another class
and derived class, this is a class
that shares an interface with its parent class.
Inside the derived class
you can redefine the members of the base
and you can also add new members.
About the scope, so the derived class scope is basically
nested in the scope of the base class.
That means that the derived class
can also access the members of the base class directly
and the members, that are defined in the derived class,
with the same name as the members in the base class.
They hide those members.
So that means member functions in the derived
do not overload members from the base.
If you nevertheless want to access these hidden members,
then you can just use the scope operator for it.
Then you have a specific access label or access specifier
and this is the protected one.
If you have members,
that you define after that protected specifier,
then these may be accessed by class members
and also friends and by the members of a derived class
and not by the ordinary users.
So it's not public.
From the syntax point of view
you have then after the class,
so you write class "myclass",
the class derivation list after ":"
and there you can basically list all the base classes
you inherit from, with optional access label.
By default if you don't write an access label,
then the type of inheritance depends
on the keyword used to define the derived class.
By default that means if you have a derived class
defined by the struct keyword, then public
and if it's by the class keyword, then private.
Now, if you look at it conceptionally,
then that means derived objects contain their base class
as sub objects.
However, there is no requirement that the compiler
in fact lays out the base and derived class parts
as an object in memory contiguously.
So there is no rule that enforces that.
A class must be defined to be used as a base class.
You can also prevent that by the final keyword,
when you define the class.
Then you cannot use it as a base class.
If you do forward declarations,
then you must not include this class derivation lists
and the so-called immediate or direct base class,
means the base class from which you directly derive.
Example: this class base here is just an empty class
and then you have the class "d1".
And then you have your class derivation list,
where you have the base class publicly derived "public Base".
As said, you cannot do it when you only have
the class declaration.
So the second line would result in an error.
Here, first of all, you have again visualized
how such a derived object looks like.
So, this "Derived 1" contains now
as a sub object the base object
and then you can of course for example assign something.
So you can assign a derived class to base.
What happens then is basically
only the sub object is assigned
and the rest of the derived is lost.
So this is also called slicing down.
Of course this can be very dangerous,
because all parts that are not in the base class,
all member functions, all data is lost after the assignment
So how happens the conversion from derived to base?
So when you call a base class copy constructor
or assignment operator on an object of type
derrived class, then first the derived class object
is converted to a reference to base class.
That means only that a base class reference
is bound to the derived class object.
Then this reference is passed as an argument
to the copy constructor or assignment operator.
After that those operators use the base class part
of the derived class to initialize the members
of the base class,
on which the constructor was called.
And then last step once the operator completes,
the object is a base class.
Now it contains a copy of the base class part
of the derived class,
from which it was initialized but the derived class part
of the argument is ignored.
So, exactly as I have mentioned before.
Then towards polymorphism.
So, you have these virtual functions.
These are also regular member functions,
but they now define type specific behavior.
If you call such a virtual function through a reference
or a pointer, then they are resolved at runtime
and of course they can have a dynamic type.
And if this dynamic type differs from the static type,
then you also will result in a call,
that realizes the dynamic polymorphism.
Again the dynamic type is a type at runtime
and the static type is the compile time type
So this is what you basically have to write down.
And when the compiler runs at compile time,
this is the type that the compiler assumes for your object
What else do you have?
You have the possibility to define pure virtual functions
this is basically a virtual function
that you then do not implement.
So the function body is missing,
but you just write "= 0"
at the end of the functions parameter list.
And that results then in an abstract base class,
because the implementation is missing
of this function.
You also cannot create an object of this class
and that means it becomes an abstract base class.
They are used basically to define interfaces.
So, they are very important
and if you derive then from this abstract base class,
in the derived class you can complete the type
by basically implementing your pure virtual function
and then of course you can create objects of that type
and you can also use dynamic polymorphism.
Last thing I want to mention in this context
are virtual destructors.
So basically a derived class destructor
automatically invokes the base class destructor
and the root class of an inheritance hierarchy
should define a virtual destructor.
Why? Because then you assure a proper deleting
of your pointer members,
because depending on the dynamic type
the right destructor and then also in the right order
in your class hierarchy is called.
So if a virtual is called
from inside a constructor or a destructor,
it runs the version defined for the type
of the constructor or destructor itself.
So this is a very crucial rule.
Always define the destructor of your base class as virtual!
[Music]